Scala3 Documentation (#3)
scalacenter/docs.scala-lang: _overviews/scala3-book/domain-modeling-fp.md

---
title: FP Modeling
type: section
description: This chapter provides an introduction to FP domain modeling with Scala 3.
num: 22
previous-page: domain-modeling-oop
next-page: methods-intro
---

> This chapter provides an introduction to functional programming (FP) style domain modeling in Scala 3. When modeling the world around us with FP, you typically use these Scala constructs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter provides an introduction to domain modeling using functional programming (FP) in Scala 3. When modeling the world around us with FP, you typically use these Scala constructs:
```

- Enumerations
- Case classes
- Traits

## Introduction

In FP, the *data* and the *operators on that data* are two separate things; you aren’t forced to encapsulate them together like you do with OOP.

> The concept is like numerical algebra. When you think about whole numbers whose values are greater than or equal to zero, you have a *set* of possible values that looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The concept is similar to numerical algebra. When you think about whole numbers whose values are greater than or equal to zero, you have a *set* of possible values that looks like this:
```

> The concept is like numerical algebra. When you think about whole numbers whose values are greater than or equal to zero, you have a *set* of possible values that looks like this:

Reviewer: Aren't whole numbers by definition greater or equal than 0 ?

Reviewer 2: no whole numbers just means not floating point

````
0, 1, 2 ... Int.MaxInt
````

Ignoring the division of whole numbers, the possible *operators* on those values are:

````
+, -, *
````

An FP design is implemented in a similar way:

- You have a set of values
- You have a collection of operators that work on those values

In this chapter we’ll model the data and operations for a “pizza” in a pizza store. You’ll see how to implement the “data” portion of the Scala/FP model, and then you’ll see several different ways you can organize the operations on that data.

## Modeling the data

> Modeling the “data” portion of a domain model in Scala is simple:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Describing the data model of a problem in Scala is simple:
```

Author: Your suggestion sounds good, but has the problem that one might parse the sentence as "problem in Scala" rather than "problem (in Scala)". What about:
```suggestion
In Scala, describing the data model of a programming problem is simple:
```

> - Create ADTs and GADTs with the `enum` construct

Reviewer: A quick introduction to ADT or GADT might be useful before this

Reviewer 3: I don’t know if it’s enough, but I just added a link to the ADT page at the top of this page.

Reviewer 3: I’m resolving this just to make it easier for me to find unresolved issues here, but please re-open this if you think it needs to be addressed more.

> - Use `case` classes for more complicated systems

Reviewer: Or when only product types are needed

Author: ```suggestion
- Use `case` classes if product types are sufficient or you need more fine-grained control
```

<!-- TODO: wording on that last line? -->

### Crust size, crust type, and toppings

Data concepts like crust size, crust type, and toppings are concisely modeled with the Scala 3 `enum` construct:

```scala
enum CrustSize:
  case Small, Medium, Large

enum CrustType:
  case Thin, Thick, Regular

enum Topping:
  case Cheese, Pepperoni, BlackOlives, GreenOlives, Onions
```

### Modeling a pizza

Now you can model a `Pizza` class using a `case` class:

```scala
import CrustSize._
import CrustType._
import Topping._

case class Pizza(
  crustSize: CrustSize,
  crustType: CrustType,
  toppings: Seq[Topping]
)
```

And that’s it. That’s the data model for an FP-style pizza system. This solution is very concise because it doesn’t require the operations on a pizza to be combined with the data model. The data model is easy to read, like declaring the design for a relational database.

> <!-- TODO: compare this with C-style structs and others? -->

Reviewer: I do not think we should worry about comparing our constructs with those from other languages

> <!-- TODO: compare this with C-style structs and others? -->

Author: Agreed.
```suggestion

```

#### More of the data model

> Because that was very short, you may prefer to see more of the data model for an entire pizza-ordering system. Here are a few other `case` classes that are used to model such a system:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because that was very short, you might consider this data modeling approach for the entire pizza-ordering system. Here are a few other `case` classes that are used to model such a system:
```

```scala
case class Address(
  street1: String,
  street2: Option[String],
  city: String,
  state: String,
  zipCode: String
)

case class Customer(
  name: String,
  phone: String,
  address: Address
)

case class Order(
  pizzas: Seq[Pizza],
  customer: Customer
)
```

#### “Skinny domain objects”

> In his book, *Functional and Reactive Domain Modeling*, Debasish Ghosh states that where OOP practitioners describe their classes as “rich domain models” that encapsulate data and behaviors, FP data models can be thought of as “skinny domain objects.” This is because — as this lesson shows — the data models are defined as `case` classes with attributes, but no behaviors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In his book, *Functional and Reactive Domain Modeling*, Debasish Ghosh states that where OOP practitioners describe their classes as “rich domain models” that encapsulate data and behaviors, FP data models can be thought of as “skinny domain objects.” This is because — as this lesson shows — the data models are defined as `case` classes with attributes, but no behaviors, resulting in short and concise data structures.
```

## What about the operations?

> This leads to an interesting question: Because FP separates the data from the operations on that data, how do you implement those operations in Scala/FP?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This leads to an interesting question: Because FP separates the data from the operations on that data, how do you implement those operations in Scala?
```

> There are several different ways to handle behaviors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several different ways to implement and organize behaviors:
```

> - Put your methods in companion objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Put your functions in companion objects
```
if we want to use the fp terminology

- Use a modular programming style
- Use a “functional objects” approach

These solutions are shown in the next three sections.
<!-- TODO: is there ONE preferred solution? -->

>An important point about all of the following solutions is that the methods and functions shown are *pure functions*. They don’t mutate any data; they receive an object, and apply transformation functions to that data to return new data.

> <!-- TODO: link to "pure function" definition -->

Reviewer: The definition of pure function should more formal and precise

Reviewer 3: I agree! :) Can you or anyone else recommend one? I haven’t looked at the comments further down on this Github page, so I don’t yet know if anyone address this, but I put a note about this in the *fp-pure-functions.md* file, looking for a better definition.

Reviewer 4: You can draw inspiration from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming#Pure_functions (or just link to that page)

## (1) Handling behavior with a companion object

> A first approach is to put the behaviors — the methods — in a companion object. With this approach, you put the data model in a `case` class, and then put the methods in a companion object of the `case` class.

Reviewer: Maybe you could remind the reader that the companion object of a class is simply an object with the same name

    p.copy(toppings = newToppings)

  def removeTopping(p: Pizza, t: Topping): Pizza =
    val newToppings = ListUtils.dropFirstMatch(p.toppings, t)
    p.copy(toppings = newToppings)

  def removeAllToppings(p: Pizza): Pizza =
    val newToppings = Seq[Topping]()
    p.copy(toppings = newToppings)

  def updateCrustSize(p: Pizza, cs: CrustSize): Pizza =
    p.copy(crustSize = cs)

  def updateCrustType(p: Pizza, ct: CrustType): Pizza =
    p.copy(crustType = ct)
```

With this approach you can create an initial `Pizza` like this:

```scala
val pizza1 = Pizza(Small, Thin, Seq(Cheese, Onions))
```

Then as a customer edits their order, you create new `Pizza` instances by making changes to an initial object, while assigning the result to a new variable:

```scala
val pizza2 = Pizza.addTopping(pizza1, Pepperoni)
val pizza3 = Pizza.updateCrustSize(pizza2, Large)
```

If you prefer to get rid of all those `Pizza` references, you can eliminate them by importing the methods from the `Pizza` companion object:

````
import Pizza._

val pizza1 = Pizza(Small, Thin, Seq(Cheese, Onions))
val pizza2 = addTopping(pizza1, Pepperoni)
val pizza3 = updateCrustSize(pizza2, Large)
````

> ## (2) Handling behavior with a modular approach

Reviewer: This title is a bit too vague imho.
You are doing the same as above but following the contract specified in a trait.

Reviewer 3: I think Jonathan’s changes address this, so I’m resolving this comment.
